             Five-layer MLP on Census    AlexNet on CIFAR-10       VGG-11 on CIFAR-10             ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10


 𝐴𝐴(s)



            Five-layer MLP on TV news   AlexNet on Tiny-ImageNet   VGG-11 on Tiny-ImageNet       ResNet-18 on Tiny-ImageNet

 𝐴𝐴(𝑠𝑠)




                      Order                      Order                     Order                           Order


Figure 6: Average adversarial sensitivity A(s) of s-order interactive concepts to adversarial pertur-
bations. Low-order interactive concepts are usually much less sensitive to adversarial attacks than
high-order interactive concepts.


Can we use interactive concepts in this paper to verify the heuristic findings of adversarial
robustness in [43]? According to EquationP(2), we can represent the inference logic of a DNN by
a set of interactive concepts, i.e., v(x) ≈ S∈Ωsalient I(S|x). In this way, we conduct experiments
to evaluate the sensitivity of each interactive concept S to adversarial perturbations. The symbolic
conceptual representation of interactive concepts allows us to measure the adversarial robustness in a
more direct way. That is, if the effect of an interactive concept does not significantly change under
adversarial attacks, we consider this interactive concept is robust to adversarial attacks. In contrast, if
the effect of an interactive concept changes significantly under adversarial attacks, we consider this
interactive concept is sensitive to adversarial attacks.
                                                                                             
To this end, we use the metric α(S) = Ex∈X [|I(S|x + δ) − I(S|x)|] /Ex∈X |I(S|x)|] to evaluate the
sensitivity of the interactive concept S to adversarial perturbations, where δ denotes the adversarial
perturbation generated by the ℓ∞ attack [33]. In this way, a small α(S) value indicates that the
interactive concept S is robust to the adversarial attack.
We follow experimental settings in the experimental verification paragraph of Section 3.2 to evaluate
different DNNs. Figure 6 shows that compared to high-order interactive concepts, low-order concepts
usually obtain smaller A(s) = ES⊆N,|S|=s [α(S)] values. Such phenomena demonstrate that low-order
interactive concepts are more robust to adversarial attacks.

4.2       Connections to existing findings on what are learned first by a DNN

In this subsection, we discuss some related studies on which kind of knowledge is usually first learned
by a DNN. Most previous studies conducted experiments to explore the knowledge that was easier
to be learned by a DNN, without providing much theoretical support. However, we find that our
theorems can partially explain mechanisms behind some previous findings.
• Arpit et al. [5] trained DNNs to classify both normal samples and white-noise samples to different
object categories. In this way, they considered that the DNN encoded simple concepts to classify
normal samples, but the DNN had to learn complex concepts to classify white noises to randomly-
assigned labels. They observed that the DNN usually learned normal samples first, because the
classification accuracy of normal samples increased before that of white noises. To this end, our
research provides more insights into such an observation. Specifically, Cheng et al. [8] have proven
that the classification of noisy data usually depends on high-order concepts, i.e., the classification of
noisy data forces the DNN to memorize each specific white-noise sample as a specific high-order
interactive concept. Let us combine this conclusion with our finding that high-order interactive
concepts are hard to learn. Then, we can easily owe the slow learning of white-noise samples
observed in [5] to the difficulty of learning high-order concepts.
• Mangalam and Prabhu [34] considered/defined easy samples as training samples that could be
correctly classified by shallow machine learning models, such as support vector machine (SVM)
and random forests (RF). They discovered that DNNs first learned easy samples, and then gradually
learned more about hard samples. To this end, our research verifies such observation. Specifically, we
claim that easy samples mainly contain low-order interactive concepts. Thus, hard samples mainly
contain high-order interactive concepts corresponding to complex interactions between numerous


                                                               9
