 0     log[𝑉𝑉 (𝑠𝑠) ]                                   𝐸𝐸   𝑠𝑠
                                                                                       Five-layer MLP on Census   Five-layer MLP on TV news
                                      200               𝑉𝑉 (𝑠𝑠)                                                   ResNet-18 on Tiny-ImageNet
                                                                                       ResNet-20 on CIFAR-10
 -2
                                                                                       AlexNet on CIFAR-10        AlexNet on Tiny-ImageNet
 -4                                    0                                               VGG-11 on CIFAR-10         VGG-11 on Tiny-ImageNet
      0.1n             0.5n    0.9n         0.1n            0.5n         0.9n
                       Order                            Order
Figure 2: The logarithm of √the variance of interaction effects log[V (s) ] and the stability of interaction
effects (measured by E / V (s) ). The variance V (s) of interaction effects increases along with the
                        (s)

order of interactive concepts exponentially. The stability of effects decreases along with the order.


all belong to the same subset Ωc ⊆ Ωsalient . Therefore, we can consider the interactive concepts as
common knowledge learned by the DNN, and we aim to analyze the difficulty of learning each
interactive concept with different complexity.
To facilitate the analysis, we first simplify the conceptual learning as a linear regression problem.
Specifically, we first rewrite the interaction effect of an interactive concept S . Given an input sample
x, according to Equation (4), the interaction effect of the concept S on the sample x′ (obtained by
applying some transformations on x), I(S|x′ ), can be rewritten as
                                                                 I(S|x′ ) = US · CS (x′ ),                                               (7)
where the constant US = I(S|x) denotes the interaction effect on the sample x, and the function for
the triggering state on the transformed sample x′ is given as CS (x′ ) = π∈QS US,π J(S, π|x′ )/US .
                                                                        P

Theorem 4. Given an arbitrarily masked sample xT (T ⊆ N ), the function CS (xT ) defined above
can be computed as the binary triggering state of the concept S in the sample xT .
                                                                                      Ai (xT ) = 1(S ⊆ T ),
                                                                          Y
                                       ∀ T ⊆ N, CS (xT ) =                                                                               (8)
                                                                                i∈S

where Ai (xT ) ∈ {0, 1} denotes whether the variable xi is present Ai (xT ) = 1 or being masked
Ai (xT ) = 0 in the sample xT .

The function CS (xT ) represents the triggering state of the concept S under an arbitrarily masking
condition ∀ T ⊆ N . Only when all variables in S are present under the masking condition T , the
concept S is triggered CS (xT ) = 1. If any of variables in S is masked, then the concept S will not be
triggered CS (xT ) = 0, yielding zero interaction effect I(S|xT ) = 0. Theorem 4 shows that given a
masked sample xT , the concept S is only triggered when the sample xT contains all variables in S ,
i.e., T ⊇ S .
Thus, inspired by [46], we can extend the conclusion to a continuous version that explains the output
of the DNN as a linear regression of very few salient interactive concepts based on Equation (3).
                              X                        X
                     v(x′ ) =          US · CS (x′ ) ≈            US · CS (x′ ),                  (9)
                                                   S⊆N                                     S∈Ωsalient
                                                   ′
where the triggering state CS (x ) of each interactive concept S can be considered as an input
dimension of the linear function, which reflects whether the input sample x′ contains the concept S .
Therefore, the absolute value of the weight coefficient US in Equation (9) can be viewed as the
strength of the DNN encoding the interactive concept S . Considering the sparsity of interactive
concepts discussed in Section 3.1, most interactive concepts have ignorable coefficients US ≈ 0, and
not so many concepts S have large absolute value of |US |. Thus, we can consider that the DNN only
learns a small number of salient interactive concepts.

3.2.2         Explaining the learning difficulty of concepts
Equation (9) in the previous subsection enables us to understand a DNN for the classification task as a
pseudo-linear function. Then, if an input feature dimension has a stable value (i.e., the triggering state
CS of an interactive concept S stably being present/absent) across all samples in the same category,
then we consider this feature dimension (i.e., the concept) is easy to learn. In comparison, when
we extract the same concept from different samples in the same category, if this concept exhibits
inconsistent interaction effects (e.g., such a concept does not consistently present or absent over
different samples), then this feature dimension (i.e., the concept) is hard to learn.


                                                                                6
