input variables, and thus are difficult to be classified by shallow models (e.g., the SVM and the RF).
In this way, the fast learning of low-order concepts is another understanding of the finding in [34].
• Xu et al. [63] discovered that during the training process, DNNs usually first learned samples of
low frequencies (e.g., robust to noises), and then encoded samples of high frequencies (e.g., sensitive
to noises). However, the original design of DNNs is not towards learning specific spectrums, and
techniques of deep learning are not developed by assuming a periodic loss landscape of training
samples. Therefore, we believe there should be a more direct explanation for the spectrum-learning
phenomenon discovered by [63]. To this end, our research explains this phenomenon as the difficulty
of learning high-order concepts. According to Section 4.1, low-order concepts usually are less
sensitive to input perturbations, thereby corresponding to low-frequency components defined in the
loss landscape in [63]. Accordingly, high-order concepts correspond to high-frequency components.
• Liu et al. [28] discovered that during adversarial training, the training loss of the DNN trained on
easy samples decreased faster than that of the DNN trained on hard samples. To this end, we consider
easy samples in adversarial training mentioned by [28] may mainly contain low-order interactive
concepts. It is because, as discussed in Section 4.1, [43] discovered that low-order interactions were
robust to adversarial perturbations. Thus, the fast learning of easy samples in adversarial training can
be roughly owing to the learning of low-order concepts.

5   Conclusion and discussion
In this paper, we theoretically explain the trend of DNNs learning simple concepts. Since the
emergence of interactive concepts of DNNs has been observed [45, 27] and proved [47], we aim
to theoretically explain the explicit theoretical connection between the conceptual complexity and
the difficulty of learning concepts. In this way, we prove that low-order interactive concepts in the
data are much more stable than high-order interactive concepts, which makes low-order interactive
concepts more likely to be encoded. Besides, our research can also provide new insights into several
previous empirical understandings [5, 34, 63, 28] w.r.t. the conceptual representation of DNNs.
There are very few ways to define and examine what is a “concept.” In this paper, we only use the
following three properties to support the faithfulness of using sparse salient interactions as concepts
encoded by the DNN.
• Ren et al. [47] have proved that a well-trained DNN can encode just a small number of salient
interactions for inference under some common conditions.
• Ren et al. [45] have proved that, such a small number of salient interactions extracted from a sample
can well mimic DNN’s outputs on numerous masked samples.
• Li and Zhang [27] have discovered that salient interactions have considerable transferability and
strong discrimination power.
However, the above properties cannot guarantee a clear correspondence between an interactive
concept and a concept in human cognition. Up to now, we cannot mathematically formulate what is a
concept in cognitive science. Thus, there is still a long way to unify the learning difficulty of a DNN
and the cognitive difficulty of human beings.

Acknowledgments
This work is partially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (62276165),
National Key R&D Program of China (2021ZD0111602), Shanghai Natural Science Foundation
(21JC1403800,21ZR1434600), National Nature Science Foundation of China (U19B2043). This
paper is also partially supported by Huawei Technologies Inc.

References
 [1] Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto. Information dropout: Learning optimal representations
     through noisy computation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
     40(12):2897–2905, 2018.
 [2] Sravanti Addepalli, Anshul Nasery, Venkatesh Babu Radhakrishnan, Praneeth Netrapalli, and
     Prateek Jain. Feature reconstruction from outputs can mitigate simplicity bias in neural networks.
     2022.


                                                  10
