                            Defects of Convolutional Decoder Networks in Frequency Representation
 Input, spectrum                                        Epochs Input, spectrum                                           Epochs




                   (a) CIFAR-10 dataset                                                  (b) Broden dataset

Figure 6. Magnitude maps of feature spectrums of different epochs’ network output. Each magnitude map was averaged over all channels.
For clarity, we moved low frequencies to the center of the spectrum map, and moved high frequencies to corners of the spectrum map.
Note that we set the magnitude of the fundamental frequency to be the same with the magnitude of the second significant frequency.
For resutls in (b), we only visualized components in the center of the spectrum map with the range of relatively low frequencies
u ∈ {u|0 ≤ u < M/8} ∪ {u|7M/8 ≤ u < M }; v ∈ {v|0 ≤ v < N/8} ∪ {v|7N/8 ≤ v < N } for clarity.


the image pass through four cascaded upsampling layers. We visualized the feature spectrum generated by each upsampling
layer, in order to verify whether the upsampling operation repeated the strong magnitude of the fundamental frequency of
the input image to different frequency components of the feature spectrum generated by upsampling layers. Results on the
CIFAR-10 dataset and the Tiny-ImageNet dataset in Figure 8 verified Theorem 4.4.
Second, we provide more results on real neural networks, which have already been shown in Figure 1(b) in the main paper.
We also constructed a cascaded convolutional auto-encoder by using the VGG-16 as the encoder network. The decoder
network contained four upconvolutional layers. Each convolutional/upconvolutional layer in the auto-encoder applied
zero-paddings and was followed by a batch normalization layer and an ReLU layer. The auto-encoder was trained on the
Broden dataset using the mean squared error (MSE) loss for image reconstruction. Results in Figure 9 verified Theorem 4.4.

C.3. Verifying that the zero-padding operation strengthened the encoding of low-frequency components.
In section, we provide more experimental results to verify that the zero-padding operation strengthened the encoding of
low-frequency components, which had already been shown in Figure 4(c) in the main paper. Here, we also constructed
the following three baseline networks. The first baseline network contained 5 convolutional layers, and each layer applied
zero-paddings. Each convolutional layer contained 16 convolutional kernels (kernel size was 7×7), except for the last
layer containing 3 convolutional kernels. The second baseline network and the third baseline network were constructed by
replacing all zero-padding operations with circular padding operations and replacing all zero-padding operations with mirror
padding operations, respectively. Results in Figure 10 verified that the zero-padding operation strengthened the encoding of
low-frequency components.

C.4. Verifying that a deep network strengthened low-frequency components.
In section, we provide more experimental results to verify that a deep network strengthened low-frequency components,
which had already been shown in Figure 4(a) in the main paper. Here, we also constructed a network with 50 convolutional
layers. Each convolutional layer applied zero-paddings to avoid changing the size of feature maps, and was followed by an
ReLU layer. We visualized feature spectrums of different convolutional layers. Results on the CIFAR-10 dataset and the
Tiny-ImageNet dataset in Figure 11 show that magnitudes of low-frequency components increased along with the network
layer number.

C.5. Verifying that a larger absolute mean value µl of each l-th layer’s parameters strengthened low-frequency
     components.
In section, we provide more experimental results to verify that a larger absolute mean value µl of each l-th layer’s parameters
strengthened low-frequency components, which had already been shown in Figure 4(b) in the main paper. Here, we also

                                                                28
