                             Defects of Convolutional Decoder Networks in Frequency Representation

(1) the Law of Large Numbers, and (2) the independent effects log(|µl Ruv |2 + K 2 σl2 ) between different layers’ T (l,uv) on
log SOM(T(uv)(L:1) ) = L                 2   2 2
                      P
                        l=1 log(|µl Ruv | + K σl ).
                                                                                                        low low
Therefore, the large |Rulow vlow | value for a low-frequency component [ulow , v low ] makes T(u v )(L:1) more likely to have
                                                                                                                high high
a large norm, whereas the small |Ruhigh vhigh | value for a high-frequency component [uhigh , v high ] makes T(u v )(L:1) less
likely to have a large norm. This indicates that a deep decoder network will almost certainly strengthen the encoding
of low-frequency components of the input sample, while weaken the encoding of high-frequency components.

B.2. Effects of the initialization of network parameters
If the expectation µl of convolutional weights in each l-th layer has a large absolute value |µl |, then the decoder network
is less likely to learn high-frequency components. It is because according to Theorem 4.2, a large absolute value |µl |
boosts the imbalance effects |µl Ruv |2 among different frequency components, thereby strengthening the trend of encoding
low-frequency components of the input sample.

B.3. Effects of the convolutional kernel size
If the convolutional kernel size K is small, then the decoder network is less likely to learn high-frequency components. It
is because according to Theorem 4.2, a large K value alleviates imbalance of the second-order moment SOM(T(uv)(L:1) )
between low frequencies and high frequencies caused by the imbalance of |Ruv |. Thus, a small K value strengthens the
trend of encoding low-frequency components of the input sample.

B.4. Effects of the distribution of the training data
If the cascaded convolutional decoder network is trained on natural images, then the decoder network is less likely to learn
high-frequency components. Previous studies (Ruderman, 1994) have empirically found that natural images were dominated
by low-frequency components. Specifically, frequency spectrums of natural images follow a Power-law distribution. I.e.,
low-frequency components (e.g., the frequency
                                     q         component [u, v] closed to [0, 0], [0, N − 1], [M − 1, 0], and [M − 1, N − 1])
                                               (c) 2
have much larger length kg(uv) k2 =
                                             P
                                           c |Guv | than other frequency components. Besides, according to rules of the
forward propagation in Equation (4) and the change of T (l,uv) in Equation (5), if the frequency component g(uv) of the input
image has a large magnitude, then h(uv) of the output image also has a large magnitude. This means that using natural
images as the input strengthens the trend of encoding low-frequency components.

C. More experimental results
C.1. Verifying that a neural network usually learned low-frequent components first.
In section, we provide more experimental results to verify that a neural network usually learned low-frequent components
first, which had already been shown in Figure 1(a) in the main paper. Here, we also constructed a cascaded convolutional auto-
encoder by using the VGG-16 as the encoder network. The decoder network contained three upconvolutional layers for the
CIFAR-10 dataset, and contained three upconvolutional layers for the Broden dataset. Each convolutional/upconvolutional
layer in the auto-encoder applied zero-paddings and was followed by a batch normalization layer and an ReLU layer. The
auto-encoder was trained using the mean squared error (MSE) loss for image reconstruction. Results in Figure 6 verified that
the auto-encoder usually learned low-frequent components first and gradually learned higher frequecies. We also attached
the generated image below its spectrum map in Figure 7, in order to help people understand the learning process of the
auto-encoder.

C.2. Verifying that the upsampling operation made a decoder network repeat strong signals at certain frequencies
     of the generated image.
In section, we provide more experimental results to verify that the upsampling operation in the decoder repeats strong
frequency components of the input to generate spectrums of upper layers.
First, we conducted experiments to verify Theorem 4.4 in the main paper, which claims that the upsampling operation
repeats the strong magnitude of the fundamental frequency G(c)          00 of the lower layer to different frequency components
      (c)
∀c, Hu∗ v∗ of the higher layer, where u∗ = 0, M0 , 2M0 , 3M0 , . . . ; v ∗ = 0, N0 , 2N0 , 3N0 , . . .. To verify this, given an image, let


                                                                    27
