       (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
           to reproduce that algorithm.
       (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
           the architecture clearly and fully.
       (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
           either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
           the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
           the dataset).
       (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
           authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
           In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
           some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
           to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5. Open access to data and code
  Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
  tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
  material?
  Answer: [No]
  Justification: The code will be released when the paper is accepted. All datasets used in
  this paper are publicly available. Nevertheless, to enhance reproducibility, we provide the
  detailed experimental settings in Appendix F.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
     • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https://nips.cc/
       public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
     • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
       possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
       including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
       benchmark).
     • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
       reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
       //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
     • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
       to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
     • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
       proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
       should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
     • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
       versions (if applicable).
     • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
       paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6. Experimental Setting/Details
  Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
  parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
  results?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: Details on dataset preprocessing can be found in Appendix F.1. Details on
  training settings can be found in Appendix F.2. Details on how to compute interactions can
  be found in Appendix F.3.


                                           32
