increased. In the second phase (from the 3rd column to the 6th column in the figure), the DNN
learned interactions of increasing orders (complexities).
How to understand the two-phase phenomenon. Previous studies [44, 26] have observed and
partially proved that the complexity/order of an interaction can reflect the generalization ability10 of
the interaction. Let us consider an interaction that is frequently extracted by a DNN from training
samples (see the transferability property in Section 3.2). If this interaction also frequently appears in
testing samples, then this interaction is considered generalizable10 ; otherwise, non-generalizable. To
this end, Zhou et al. [44] have discovered that high-order (complex) interactions are less generalizable
between training and testing samples than low-order (simple) interactions. Furthermore, Ren et
al. [26] have proved that high-order (complex) interactions are more unstable than low-order (simple)
interactions when input variables or network parameters are perturbed by random noises.
Therefore, the two-phase dynamics enable us to revisit the change of generalization power of a DNN:
1. Before training, the interactions extracted from an initialized DNN exhibited a spindle-shaped
   distribution of interaction strength over different orders. These interactions could be considered
   random patterns irrelevant to the task, and such patterns were mostly of medium orders.
2. In the first phase, the DNN mainly removed the irrelevant patterns caused by the randomly
   initialized parameters. At the same time, the DNN shifted its attention to low-order interactions
   between very few input variables. These low-order interactions usually represented relatively
   simple and generalizable10 inference patterns, without encoding complex inference patterns.
3. In the second phase, the DNN gradually learned interactions of increasing orders (increasing
   complexities). Although there was no clear boundary between under-fitting and over-fitting
   in mathematics, the learning of very complex interactions had been widely considered as a
   typical sign of over-fitting10 [44].
3.3 Proving of the two-phase dynamics
3.3.1 Analytic solution to interaction effects
As the foundation of proving the dynamics of the two phases, let us first derive the analytic solution
to interaction effects at a specific time point during the training process. Then, Sections 3.3.2 and
3.3.3 will use this analytic solution to further explain detailed dynamics in the second phase and the
first phase, respectively. Later experiments show that our theory can well predict the true dynamics
of all AND-OR interactions during the learning of real DNNs.
The proof in this subsection can be divided into three steps. (1) We first rewrite a DNN’s inference on
an input sample as a weighted sum of triggering functions of different interactions. (2) Then, we can
reformulate the learning of the DNN on an input sample as a linear regression problem. (3) Thus, the
interactions at an intermediate time point during training can be obtained as the optimal solution to
the linear regression problem under a certain level of parameter noises.
• Step 1: Rewriting a DNN’s inference on an input sample as a weighted sum of triggering
functions of different interactions. For simplicity, let us only focus on the dynamics of AND
interactions, because OR interactions can also be represented as a specific kind of AND interactions8
(see Appendix E for details). In this way, withoutP loss of generality, let us just analyze the learning
of AND interactions
          P           w.r.t. v and (x) = v(x∅ ) +  ∅̸=S⊆N Iand (S|x), and simplify the notation as v(x) =
v(x∅ ) + ∅̸=S⊆N I(S|x) in the following proof. Our conclusions can also be extended to OR
interactions, as mentioned above.
Given a DNN, we follow [26, 22] to rewrite the inference function of the network v(x). This is
inspired by the universal matching property of interactions in Theorem 2, i.e., given any arbitrarily
masked input sample x̂S w.r.t. a random subset S ⊆ N , the network
                                                                P output can always be represented
as a linear sum of different interaction effects v(x = x̂S ) = T ⊆S I(T |x = x̂). In this way, the
following equation rewrites the inference function of the DNN v(x = x̂S ) as the weighted sum of
triggering functions of interactions (see Appendix F.2 for proof).
                                                                   def
                                                                       X
            ∀ S ⊆ N, v(x = x̂S ) = f (x = x̂S ), subject to f (x) =          wT JT (x),           (6)
                                                                                     T ⊆N

   10
      Unlike the traditional definition of the over-fitting/generalization power on the entire model over the entire
dataset, the interaction first enables us to explicitly identify detailed over-fitted/generalizable inference patterns
(interactions) on a specific sample.


                                                          6
