Natural language data. We considered the input tokens as input variables for each input sentence.
Specifically, we randomly selected 10 words that are meaningful (i.e., not including stopwords,
special characters, and punctuations) as input variables in the set N to calculate interactions. We
used the “mask” token with the token id 103 to mask the tokens in the set N \ S to obtain the masked
sample xS .

Point cloud data. We clustered all the points into 30 clusters using K-means clustering, and randomly
selected 10 clusters as the input variables in the set N to calculate interactions. We used the average
coordinate of the points in each cluster to mask the corresponding cluster in N \ S and obtained the
masked sample xS .

For all DNNs and datasets, we randomly selected 50 samples from the testing set to compute
                                                                                                (k)
interactions, and averaged the interaction strength of the k-th order on each sample to obtain Ireal .

G.4    Compute resources
All DNNs can be trained within 12 hours on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU (with 24G
GPU memory). Computing all interactions on a single input sample usually takes 35-40 seconds,
which is acceptable in real applications.

H     Potential limitations of the theoretical proof
In this study, we have assumed that during the training process, the noise on the parameters gradually
decreased (σ 2 gradually became smaller). Although experiments in Figure 4 and Figure 8 have
verified that the theoretical distribution of interaction strength can well match the real distribution by
using a set of decreasing σ 2 values, it is not exactly clear how the value of σ 2 is related to the training
process. The value of σ 2 probably does not decrease linearly along with the training epochs/iterations,
which needs more precise formulations.

I     More discussions about the two-phase dynamics
I.1   Does the model re-learn the initial interactions during the second phase?
Our theory does not claim that in the second phase, a DNN will not re-encode an interaction that is
removed in the first phase. Instead, Theorem 4 and Proposition 1 collectively indicate the possibility
of a DNN gradually re-encoding a few higher-order interactions in the second phase along with the
decrease of the parameter noise.

The key point to this question is that the massive interactions in a fully initialized DNN are all chaotic
and meaningless patterns caused by randomly initialized network parameters. Therefore, the crux
of the matter is not whether the DNN re-learns the initially removed interactions, but the fact that
the DNN mainly removes chaotic and meaningless initial interactions in the first phase, and learns
potential target interactions in the second phase. In this way, although a few interactions may be
re-encoded later in the second phase, we do not consider this as a problem with the training of a
DNN.

I.2   About extending the theoretical analysis to specific network architectures
Our current analysis is agnostic to the network architecture, and aims to explain the common two-
phase dynamics of interactions that is shared by different network architectures for various tasks. Fig.
2 and Fig. 5 demonstrate this shared two-phase dynamics.

On the other hand, although DNNs with different architectures all exhibit the two-phase dynamics of
interactions, the length of the two phases and the finally converged state of the DNN are influenced
by the network architecture and can slightly vary among different architectures. Eq. (10) shows that
our current formulation is to use the finally converged state of a DNN to accurately predict the DNN’s
learning dynamics of interactions. Therefore, the learning dynamics predicted by our theory also
exhibits slight differences among different DNN architectures and datasets accordingly, but it still
matches well with the empirical dynamics of interactions. To this end, studying how the network
architecture affects the finally converged state of a DNN may be a good future direction.


                                                     25
