       judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
       tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
       will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3. Theory Assumptions and Proofs
  Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
  a complete (and correct) proof?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: We provide the assumptions in the main paper, and the proof for all theorems
  in Appendix E.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
     • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
       referenced.
     • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
     • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
       they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
       proof sketch to provide intuition.
     • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
       by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
     • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4. Experimental Result Reproducibility
  Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
  perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
  of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: The contribution of this paper is mainly theoretical. Nevertheless, we provide
  the detailed experimental settings in Appendix F to reproduce the experiment results. The
  code will be released when the paper is accepted.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
       well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
       whether the code and data are provided or not.
     • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
       to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
     • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
       For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
       might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
       be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
       dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
       one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
       instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
       of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
       appropriate to the research performed.
     • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
       sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
       nature of the contribution. For example


                                           31
