 (a)                                                    Interaction-based                                    𝒙 triggers              (b) A DNN usually only encodes a small
        Network output 𝑣(𝒙)
                                                          logical model          +    𝑓 𝒙 =෍
                                                                                                  𝑆⊆𝑁
                                                                                                        𝟏
                                                                                                            interaction 𝑆
                                                                                                                          ⋅ 𝐼(𝑆|𝒙)
                                                                                                                                                   number of salient interactions
                              Model equivalence                                               …                                              1.0
               …                                         𝐼or 𝑆1|𝒙 =0.2      𝐼and 𝑆2 |𝒙 =0.4       𝐼or 𝑆3|𝒙 =−0.1                                               VGG-16 on MNIST
                                                                                                                                                        A few interactions with
                                                                                                                                                             salient effects
                                                                                                                                         |𝐼 𝑆|𝒙 |
                                                                                                                                                              Most interactions have
                         The AND-OR logical model always                                                                                                        negligible effects
                         accurately mimicks outputs of the
                          DNN on all 2𝑛 masked samples                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                    1     index of interaction 𝑆   2𝑛
 (c)
         Distribution of                    Change of the distribution of interaction strength throughout the training process
           interaction
                 (𝑘)
       strength 𝐼real over
        different orders 1    order    10         1    order    10       1       order    10            1       order     10         1      order        10         1     order        10

                                                               1st phase                                                                 2nd phase


Figure 1: (a) It is proven that the DNN’s inference on a certain sample is equivalent to a logical model
              1   order 10
that uses a small    number of AND-OR interactions for inference. Each interaction corresponds to a
non-linear (AND or OR) relationship between a set S of input variables (e.g., image patches). (b)
Sparsity of interactions. We show the strength |I(S|x)| of all 2n interactions sorted in descending
order. (c) Illustration of the two-phase dynamics of a DNN learning interactions of different orders.

the change in the complexity of interactions during training, so as to explain the change of the DNN’s
generalization power during training. In particular, the time when the DNN starts to learn high-order
(complex) interactions indicates the starting point of over-fitting.
Specifically, we focus on the two-phase dynamics of interaction complexity which was empiri-
cally observed by [41], and we aim to mathematically prove this dynamics. First, before training,
a DNN with randomly initialized parameters mainly encodes interactions of medium complexities.
As Figure 2 shows, the distribution of interactions appears spindle-shaped. Then, in the first phase,
the DNN eliminates interactions of medium and high complexities, thereby mainly encoding interac-
tions of low complexity. In the second phase, the DNN gradually learns interactions of increasing
complexities. We have conducted experiments to train DNNs with various architectures for different
tasks. It shows that our theory can well predict the learning dynamics of interactions in real DNNs.
The proven two-phase dynamics explain hidden factors that push the DNN from under-fitting
to over-fitting. (1) In the first phase, the DNN mainly removes noise interactions, (2) In the second
phase, the DNN gradually learns more complex and non-generalizable interactions toward over-fitting.

2       Related work
Long-standing disappointment on the faithfulness of existing post-hoc explanation of DNNs.
Many studies [30, 40, 29, 2, 15] have explained the inference score of a DNN, but how to mathemati-
cally formulate and guarantee the faithfulness of the explanation is still an open problem. For example,
using an interpretable surrogate model to approximate the output of a DNN [3, 11, 35, 34] is a classic
explanation technique. However, the good matching between the DNN’s output and the surrogate
model’s output cannot fully guarantee that the two models use exactly the same inference patterns
and/or use the same attention. Therefore, many studies [28, 12, 1] have unanimously and empirically
arrived at a disappointing view of the faithfulness of current explanation methods. Rudin [28] pointed
out that inaccurate post-hoc explanations of DNNs would be harmful to high-stakes applications.
Ghassemi et al. [12] showed various failure cases of current explanation methods in the healthcare
field and argued that using these methods to aid medical decisions was a false hope.
New progress towards proving the faithfulness of symbolic explanation of a DNN. Despite
the disappointing view of post-hoc explanation methods, we have established a theory system of
interactions within three years, which includes more than 30 papers, to quantify the symbolic
concepts encoded by a DNN and explain the hidden factors that determine the generalization power
and robustness of a DNN. We revisit this theory system as follows.
• Proving interactions act as faithful primitives inference patterns encoded by the DNN. Recent
achievements in the theory system of interactions have provided a new perspective to formulate
primitive inference patterns encoded by a DNN. We discovered [23] and proved [27] that a DNN’s
inference logic on a certain sample can be explained by only a small number of interactions. Further-
more, we discovered that salient interactions usually represented common inference patterns shared by
different samples (sample-wise transferability of interactions) [21], and proposed a method to extract
generalizable interactions shared by different DNNs (model-wise transferability of interactions) [4].


                                                                                     2
