  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
       that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
     • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
       material.
7. Experiment Statistical Significance
  Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
  information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
  Answer: [No]
  Justification: The main contribution of this study is to provide theoretical proof for the two-
  phase dynamics phenomenon discovered in previous studies. The experiments in this study
  are mainly to reproduce the two-phase dynamics phenomenon for better illustration and to
  verify that our theory can predict the trend of the interaction dynamics on real DNNs. This
  study does not propose new methods to boost performance or discover a new phenomenon,
  so we refrain from reporting error bars for clarity.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
     • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
       dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
       the main claims of the paper.
     • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
       example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
       run with given experimental conditions).
     • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
       call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
     • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
     • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
       of the mean.
     • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
       preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
       of Normality of errors is not verified.
     • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
       figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
       error rates).
     • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
       they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8. Experiments Compute Resources
  Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
  puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
  the experiments?
  Answer: [Yes]
  Justification: We provide the compute resources needed in Appendix F.4, including the type
  of GPU and the approximate amount of time for training DNNs and computing interactions.
  Guidelines:
     • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.


                                            33
