                                  High-order interactions (usually global shapes)                                              Normal
                                                                                                                               Normal            Low-order
                                                                                                                                                   Low-order      High-order
                                                                                                                                                                      High-order
                                                                                                       ResNet-18             input image
                                                                                                                            input  image        interactions
                                                                                                                                                  interactions   interactions
                                                                                                                                                                     interactions




   Standard DNN
                   0.1n           0.95n         0.1n           0.95n     0.1n           0.95n       0.1n            0.95n
                          order                        order                    order                        order
                                                                                                           ResNet-18
Adversarially
trained DNN




                                                                                                    0.1n
                   0.1n
                          order
                                  0.95n         0.1n
                                                       order   0.95n     0.1n
                                                                                order
                                                                                        0.95n
                                                                                                             order 0.95n

                                  Low-order interactions (usually local shapes)
                   Interactions in            Adversarial effects         Interactions in           Attacking utility       Pixels with                              Pixels with
                  normal samples               on interactions         adversarial examples         to model output         weak interactions                strong interactions


Figure 1: (Left) Adversarial attacks mainly affect high-order interactions in input samples. High-order
interactions in adversarially trained DNNs are more robust than those in standard DNNs. (Right)
Regions with strong low-order and high-order interactions, which are visualized by the method
extended from [70].


interactions between input variables of a DNN. It is because in an adversarial example, adversarial
perturbations on different pixels do not attack the DNN independently. Instead, perturbation pixels
usually interact with each other to form a specific pattern for attacking. Surprisingly, we find that
such interactions can explain various aspects of adversarial robustness. Specifically, this study aims
to answer the following three questions.
• How to disentangle feature representations that are sensitive to adversarial perturbations.
Based on the game-theoretic interactions, we aim to summarize the distinct property of feature repre-
sentations, which are sensitive to adversarial perturbations, among overall feature representations.
• How to explain the effectiveness of the adversarial training. The above summarized property of
sensitive feature representations also provides a new perspective to explain the utility of the adversarial
training, i.e. why and how the adversarial training penalizes such sensitive feature representations.
• How to unify various adversarial defense methods in a single theoretic system. Our research
provides a unified understanding for the success of adversarial defense methods [65, 15, 30].
As a prerequisite of analyzing the adversarial robustness, let us first revisit the interaction between
input variables in DNNs. Let a set of input variables collaborate with each other to form an inference
pattern, the Shapley interaction index [22] is a standard metric to measure the numerical benefits
to the inference from their collaborations. This metric can be further extended to the multi-order
interaction [70]. For the interaction between two input variables (i, j), the interaction order measures
the number of contextual variables that influence the significance of the interaction between i and j.
In other words, low-order interactions represent simple collaborations between input variables with
small contexts, while high-order interactions indicate complex collaborations over large contexts (see
Figure 1 (right)).
We further prove that the network output can be decomposed into the sum of multi-order interactions
between different pairs of input variables. Thus, the overall effects of adversarial perturbations on
the network output can be decomposed into elementary effects on different interaction components.
Therefore, we can explain adversarial robustness using such elementary interaction components.
(1) We discover and partially prove that adversarial perturbations mainly affect high-order
interactions, rather than low-order interactions (see Figure 1 (left)). In comparison, low-order
interactions are naturally robust to attacks. In other words, adversarial attacks mainly affect the
complex and large-scale collaborations among most pixels in the image. Based on this, we can
successfully disentangle sensitive feature representations, i.e. high-order interactions.
Interaction vs. frequency & rank. Some studies explained adversarial examples as high-frequency
features [66, 51, 23] and high-rank features [30]. We have conducted experiments to show that
high-order interactions can better explain the essential property of attacking-sensitive representations,
i.e. the complex and large-scale visual concepts.
(2) A clear difference between standard DNNs and adversarially trained DNNs is as follows. Adver-
sarial training significantly increases the robustness of high-order interactions. In other words,
attacks mainly affect complex collaborations in standard DNNs, while for adversarially trained DNNs,
complex collaborations are not so vulnerable w.r.t. simple collaborations.


                                                                                                2
