the cutout method can be considered as removing high-order interactions and pushing DNNs to learn
more insensitive low-order interactions. Therefore, the learned DNN is robust to adversarial attacks.
In experiments, we applied the dropout operation to the misclassified adversarial examples, in order to
verify the attacking-alleviating influence on the network output of removing high-order interactions.
If the removal of high-order interactions could alleviate the effects of adversarial attacks, it would
prove the attacking-alleviating influence of removing high-order interactions. Given ResNet-18/50
and DenseNet-161 trained on the ImageNet dataset, we selected normal samples that are correctly
classified in the validation set of the ImageNet dataset, and generated adversarial examples with the
ℓ∞ untargeted PGD attack based on [62]. The attack was stopped once it succeeded. We applied
the dropout operation with different dropout rates α at the pixel level, and the dropped pixels were
filled with the average value of surrounding pixels. For the cutout method, we set the length of the
side of the masked square regions as 112, which was half of the side length of the input sample
(dropping α = 25% pixels of the input), following settings in [15]. Table 1 reports the ratio of
adversarial examples whose classification results were corrected. When we applied dropout to
adversarial examples, the classification accuracy of adversarial examples significantly increased,
and even performed better than the cutout method. This indicated that the removal of high-order
interactions presented a more essential defense mechanism than the cutout method.

5   Conclusion
In this paper, we have used the multi-order interaction to provide a unified understanding for the
success of adversarial attacks and defense. Based on the multi-order interaction, we have explained
adversarial attacking as mainly affecting high-order interactions between input variables. Furthermore,
we have also explained the success of adversarial training, i.e. learning more category-specific low-
order interactions to boost the robustness. Besides, we have further provided a unified explanation for
some existing adversarial defense methods.

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work is partially supported by National Science and Technology Innovation 2030 Major Project
of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China under Grant (2021ZD0111602), the National
Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 61906120, U19B2043), Shanghai Natural Science Foun-
dation (21JC1403800,21ZR1434600), Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project
(2021SHZDZX0102). This work is also partially supported by Huawei Technologies Inc. Prof.
Yisen Wang is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62006153, and Project 2020BD006 supported by PKU-Baidu Fund. Xin Wang is supported by Wu
Wen Jun Honorary Doctoral Scholarship, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.




                                                  10
