Table 3: The distance between normal samples x and adversarial examples xadv , and the distance
between x and the recovered samples x̂.
                                          Standard DNN          Adversarially trained DNN
                                     Ekx − xadv k2 Ekx − x̂k2   Ekx − xadv k2 Ekx − x̂k2
                       ResNet-18         9.72        13.57         18.69           11.45
                       ResNet-50         9.56        13.40         18.34           12.68
                      DenseNet-161       9.67        13.51         18.55           13.26



I.9    More discussions about the comparison with frequency-based methods

In Section 4.1 of the main paper, we have compared our interaction-based metric with the frequency-
based metric. This section provides more discussions about the comparative experiment.
Previous studies [24, 20, 7] explained adversarial perturbations as high-frequency features. In this
paper, we compared the frequency metric with the interaction metric, and showed that our interaction
metric could better explain the essential property of adversarial perturbations. In order to measure the
significance of features of different frequencies in an input image x, we applied the Fourier transform
to the image to obtain the frequency spectrum F . Then, we shifted the low frequency components
         qP of the spectrum. The magnitude of the r-frequency component was quantified as
to the center
  (r)                              (h,w) k2 . In order to fairly compare these two metrics, we computed
F =           (h,w):h2 +w2 =r 2 kF        2
the Fisher’s discriminant ratio [5] using two metrics, which measured the ratio of the variance between
the classes (between normal samples and adversarial examples) to the variance within the classes.
Such experimental settings has also been introduced in Figure 6 (left) of the main paper.

I.10    Explaining high recoverability of adversarial examples on adversarially trained DNNs

In Section 4.3 of the paper, we claim that adversarial examples towards adversarially trained DNNs
usually exhibit higher recoverability than adversarial examples towards standard DNNs. In the
supplementary material, this section shows experimental results to verify the above claim.
We generated adversarial examples for normal validation samples in the ImageNet dataset by follow-
ing settings of the untargeted PGD attack [12], in which  = 16/255, and the attack was conducted
with 10 steps with the step size 2/255. Adversarial examples were generated based on ResNet-18/50
and DenseNet-161 trained on the ImageNet dataset. Then, we used same parameters to conduct the
targeted PGD attack and recover normal samples.
Table 3 shows that adversarially trained DNNs usually exhibited higher recoverability than standard
DNNs. This can be explained Proposition 1 in the paper. As we have discussed in Section 4.1 of the
paper, adversarial perturbations towards adversarially trained DNNs usually pay more attention to
low-order interactions than perturbations towards standard DNNs. On the other hand, the low-order
              (m)
interaction Iij (x) is equivalent to the conditional mutual information M I(Xi ; Xj ; Y |XS ) given
small contexts XS according to Proposition 1, while the high-order interaction corresponds to such a
mutual information conditioned on large contexts with massive variables. In general, compared to
high-order interactions, low-order interactions are conditioned on less contextual variables, thereby
suffering less from adversarial perturbations, i.e. obviously M I(Xi ; Xj ; Y |XS ) usually suffers less
from adversarial perturbations, if the condition xS only contains very few variables. In other words,
low-order interactions are more transferable among different contexts xS , so it is easy to invert
adversarial perturbations of low-order interactions. In this way, because adversarial perturbations for
adversarially trained DNNs mainly focus on low-order interactions, such perturbations are easy to be
recovered.




                                                     14
