                                      Layerwise Change of Knowledge in Neural Networks

L. Discussion on the Noise Ratio of Interactions over Different Orders
In section 3.3 of the main paper, we add a small Gaussian perturbation  ∼ N (0, σ 2 I) to the input sample x, in order to
mimic inevitable noises/variations in data. And then we use the new metrics to measure the relative stability of AND-OR
interactions of each order m as follow.
                                                                                         q              
                                          (l),m                         (l),m                  (l),m
                                 stabilityand     = Ex      E         |Eand (S, x)|         Varand (S, x)
                                                             (l),m
                                                         S∈Ωand
                                                                                         q                                   (21)
                                          (l),m                                                (l),m
                                 stabilityor    = Ex        E         |Eor(l),m (S, x)|     Varor (S, x)
                                                             (l),m
                                                         S∈Ωor


         (l),m                                             (l),m
where Eand     (S, x) = E [Iand (S|x + , v (l) )] and Varand (S, x) = Var [Iand (S|x + , v (l) )] denote the mean and variance of
                                       (l)
the AND interaction Iand (S|x + , v ) w.r.t. Gaussian perturbations , which are encoded by the l-th layer of the DNN. In
fact, higher-order interactions comprise more input variables, which means it would obtain more gaussian perturbations.
However, the signal strength of higher order interaction also increases linearly with order m. Fig.5 in the main paper shows
that low-order interactions are more stable to small noises. Here we verify that the noise ratio of each interaction is relatively
consistent over interactions of different orders, so that stability enables a fair comparison of interactions of different orders.
To this end, we used the images in CIFAR-10 dataset and annotated semantic parts in each image, following Appendix M.1.
Then we added the small Gaussian perturbation  ∼ N (0, σ 2 I) to the image x, and obtained the noise image x . For
each interaction pattern S , we calculate the ratio of noise intensity to interaction pattern signal intensity, e.g., RadioS =
kxs − xs k2 /kxs k2 .

Fig. 12 shows the distribution of RadioS under different interaction order. It can be found that the median RadioS values
for different orders interactions is basically the same, and there is no phenomenon that the noise proportion of high-order
interactions is significantly higher than that of low-order interactions. Therefore, the poor stability of the high order
interaction is not due to its noise ratio.




               Figure 12. Box-and-whisker diagram of RadioS
                                                           for interaction pattern S of different interaction order.




M. Experimental details
M.1. Annotating Semantics Parts
We followed (Li & Zhang, 2023) to annotate semantic parts in MNIST dataset and CIFAR-10 dataset. Given an input sample
xRn , the DNN may encode at most 2n interactions. The computational cost for extracting salient interactions is high, when
the number of input variables n is large. In order to overcome this issue, we simply annotate 10 –12 semantic parts in each
input sample, such that the annotated semantic parts are aligned over different samples in the same dataset. Then, each
semantic part in an input sample is taken as a “single” input variable to the DNN.
• For images in the MNIST dataset, we followed settings in (Li & Zhang, 2023) to annotate semantic parts for 100 samples.
Specifically, given an image, we divided the whole image into small patches of size 3 × 3. Considering the DNN mainly used
the digit in the foreground to make inference, we selected n = 10 patches in the foreground as input variables to calculate
interactions, in order to reduce the computational cost.
• For images in the CIFAR-10 dataset, we followed settings in (Ren et al., 2023a) to annotate semantic parts for 30 samples.
Specifically, given an image, we divided the whole image into small patches of size 4 × 4, thereby obtaining 8 × 8 image

                                                                        21
