                                     Layerwise Change of Knowledge in Neural Networks

Besides, our AND-OR interactions can be considered as the elementary factors that determine the Shapley value (?).
The Shapley value is a widely accepted standard attribution method, which assigns the numerical attribution of each
input variable to the network output score. The Shapley value satisfies linearity, nullity, symmetry, and efficiency axioms.
        P value φ(i)
The Shapley
                      1
                                   P variable1 i ∈ N can be rewritten as a re-allocation of AND-OR interactions, i.e.,,
                          of each input
φ(i) = S⊆N,S3i |S|      Iand (S) + S⊆N,S3i |S|    Ior (S). It means that the computation of the Shapley value φ(i) can be
explained as uniformly allocating the effect of each interaction I(S) to its compositional input variables i ∈ S.
• Perspective 3: If each feature dimension in an intermediate layer does not have a clear receptive field, the
explanation based on this feature dimension’s attribution will not have clear semantic meaning. In this case, we can
only use interactions to explain the DNN. For example, in an MLP, each feature dimension in an intermediate layer does
not have a clear receptive field on input variables, i.e.,, this feature dimension does not have a clear physical meaning. In this
case, visualizing the attribution of the feature dimension does not provide an intuitive explanation. so that it is meaningless
to compute the attribution/importance of these features. In comparison, Figure. 6 shows that interactions extracted from a
high layer still have clear physical meaning, and interactions used for computing a high-layer feature can also be aligned
with interactions for computing a low-layer feature.

C. Proving the OR Interaction Can Be Considered A Specific AND Interaction
The OR interaction Ior (S|x) can be considered as a specific AND interaction interaction Iand (S|x), when we we inverse the
definition of masked states and unmasked states of the input variable.
Specifically, given an input sample x ∈ Rn , let xN \T denote the masked sample obtained by masking input variables in T ,
while leaving variables in N \ T unaltered. Here, we mask the input variable i ∈ T to the baseline value bi to represent its
masked state, as follows.                                  (
                                                                    xi , i ∈ N \ T
                                                  (xN \T )i =                                                                (11)
                                                                    bi , i ∈ T

Then, let us consider the masked sample x0T , where we inverse the definition of the masked state and the unmasked state of
each input variable to obtain this masked sample. That is, we mask input variables in the set N \ T to baseline values, and
keep variables in T unchanged, as follows.
                                                               (
                                                                   xi , i ∈ T
                                                   (x0T )i =                                                                 (12)
                                                                   bi , i ∈ N \ T

Thus, the OR interaction Iand (S|x) in Eq. 2 in main paper can be represented by the specific AND interaction Iand (S|x0 ), as
follows.                                               X
                                           Ior (S|x) = −              (−1)|S|−|T | v(xN \T ),
                                                               T ⊆S
                                                           X
                                                    =−                (−1)|S|−|T | v(x0T ),                                  (13)
                                                               T ⊆S

                                                    = −Iand (S|x0 ).

In this way, based on Eq. (13), the proven sparsity of AND interactions in (Ren et al., 2024) also proves the sparsity of OR
interactions, i.e., most well-trained DNNs usually encode a small number of OR interactions.

D. Discussion on Techniques and Limitations of Classifier Probe
Probing classifiers have become one of the prominent methodologies for interpreting and analyzing deep neural network
models. This approach involves training a classifier to predict a specific linguistic property based on the representations
generated by a model. In our study, we utilize this technique by selecting features from the mid-layers of a neural network.
These selected features are then used to train a linear classifier, enabling us to assess and understand the knowledge contained
within the mid-layer features of the neural network. However, it’s important to acknowledge that the probing classifiers
approach is not without its drawbacks. Belinkov (2022) have outlined the limitations of this framework, and we will explore
these challenges in the following discussion.
• A primary challenge arises in how we interpret the performance from the probing classifier, particularly in selecting an
appropriate baseline for comparison. Our study diverges from the traditional method of directly comparing overall model

                                                                   13
