                                                         Layerwise Change of Knowledge in Neural Networks

A. Detailed Analysis for Previous Studies Using Knowledge to Explain DNNs
Explaining and quantifying the exact knowledge encoded by a DNN presents a significant challenge to explainable AI. So
far, there has not existed a widely accepted definition of knowledge that enables us to accurately disentangle and quantify
knowledge encoded by intermediate layers of a DNN, because it covers various aspects of cognitive science, neuroscience,
and mathematics. To this end, previous works have employed different methods to quantify knowledge encoded by a DNN.
Then, let us revisit previous studies from the perspective of three challenges mentioned in Section 1.
First, Bau et al. (2017); Kim et al. (2018) associated neurons with manually annotated semantics/concepts (knowledge).
However, these works could not quantify the exact amount of knowledge in the DNN, or discover new concepts emerged
in intermediate layers. Second, learning interpretable neural networks with meaningful features in intermediate layers
was another classic direction in explainable AI (Zhang et al., 2020; Shen et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2019). Although these
studies automatically learned meaningful concepts without human annotations, they did not provide a mathematically
guaranteed boundary for each concept/knowledge. Thus, these works could not quantify the exact amount of newly
emerged/forgotten/unexplainable knowledge in each layer.
Third, the information-bottleneck theory (Shwartz-Ziv & Tishby, 2017; Saxe et al., 2018) used the mutual information
between inputs and intermediate-layer features to quantify knowledge encoded by the DNN. However, the mutual information
could only measure the overall information contained in each feature, but could not accurately quantify exact knowledge
represented by the newly emerged information and the forgotten information. Besides, Kolchinsky et al. (2019) showed the
mutual information was difficult to measure accurately, and Wang et al. (2022); Saxe et al. (2018) discovered the mutual
information had mathematical flaws in explaining the generalization power of a DNN.
Fourth, Liang et al. (2020) disentangled feature components from each layer, which could be reconstructed by features in
other layers, so as to evaluate the changes of features in different layers. However, the changes of features in different layers
could not be aligned to the same feature space for fair comparison, and could not be employed to explain the generalization
capacity of the DNN.

B. Comparison between Interaction-based Explanation and Attribution Interpretability Methods
We compare our interaction-based explanation with attribution interpretability methods from the following three perspectives.
• Perspective 1: Whether the method can explain the detailed inference logic of a DNN. We have conducted a new
experiment to show explanation results of other interpretability methods for comparison. Figure 6 shows that the main
difference between our interaction-based explanation and traditional attribution methods (such as Integrated Gradient (?),
Shapley value (?), and etc.) is that the interaction-based explanation precisely shows the detailed inference logic of the DNN,
while attribution methods can only provide the importance score of each input variable to the network output. Thus, our
method can provide a more precise explanation than attribution methods, and the faithfulness of our method is theoretically
ensured by the universal matching property in Theorem 3.3.
                             Our method: explaining interactions                                 Integrate Gradient: estimating                                     Shapley value: estimating
                                as detailed inference patterns                                  importance of each input variable                                importance of each input variable



                                                                   Attribution values of the
          Computing
                                                                        output feature                                               Computing Shapley
    interactions based on
                                                                    embeddings of the 8th                                            values based on the
     the feature after the
                                                                     transformer block,                                              feature after the 8th
      8th transformer
                                                                   which are computed by                                             transformer block
            block
                                                                     Integrated Gradient



         Computing
     interactions based
                                                                   Attribution values of the
      on the feature of                                                                                                                Computing Shapley
                                                                   input feature, which are
       the final layer                                                                                                                 values based on the
                                                                    computed by Integrated
                                                                                                                                    feature of the final layer
                                                                           Gradient




Figure 6. The comparison of explanation results between our interaction-based method, Integrated Gradient, and Shapley value.

• Perspective 2: Theoretical connections between AND-OR interactions and attribution explanation methods.

                                                                                               12
