Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




W HERE W E H AVE A RRIVED IN P ROVING THE E MER -
GENCE OF S PARSE I NTERACTION P RIMITIVES IN
DNN S
 Qihan Ren, Jiayang Gao, Wen Shen, Quanshi Zhang∗
 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
 {renqihan,gjy0515,adashen,zqs1022}@sjtu.edu.cn



                                            A BSTRACT
         This study aims to prove the emergence of symbolic concepts (or more precisely,
         sparse primitive inference patterns) in well-trained deep neural networks (DNNs).
         Specifically, we prove the following three conditions for the emergence. (i) The
         high-order derivatives of the network output with respect to the input variables are
         all zero. (ii) The DNN can be used on occluded samples and when the input sam-
         ple is less occluded, the DNN will yield higher confidence. (iii) The confidence of
         the DNN does not significantly degrade on occluded samples. These conditions
         are quite common, and we prove that under these conditions, the DNN will only
         encode a relatively small number of sparse interactions between input variables.
         Moreover, we can consider such interactions as symbolic primitive inference pat-
         terns encoded by a DNN, because we show that inference scores of the DNN on
         an exponentially large number of randomly masked samples can always be well
         mimicked by numerical effects of just a few interactions. The code is available at
         https://github.com/sjtu-xai-lab/interaction-sparsity.

1   I NTRODUCTION
In the field of explainable AI, one of the fundamental problems is whether the inference logic of a
deep neural network (DNN) can really be explained as symbolic concepts. Although some interest-
ing phenomena of the emergence of concepts in DNNs have been discovered in previous studies (Li
& Zhang, 2023b; Ren et al., 2023a), the core problem is still not strictly formulated or proven, i.e.,
strictly proving whether the knowledge encoded by DNNs is indeed symbolic.
To this end, it is a significant challenge to prove whether or not the knowledge encoded by a black-
box DNN is symbolic. Up to now, heuristic studies usually explained DNN features using manually
annotated concepts (Bau et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2018), without formally defining or proving the
concepts in a DNN. Thus, the proof of the emergence of symbolic concepts in DNNs will have a
profound impact on both theory and practice.
However, the definition of concepts encoded by a DNN is still an open problem, because it is a
complex cross-disciplinary issue related to cognitive science, neuroscience, and mathematics. Nev-
ertheless, let us ignore cognitive issues and limit our discussion to the scope of whether we can
obtain a relatively small set of primitive inference patterns to strictly explain the complex changes
of inference scores of the DNN on different input samples.
To be precise, we hope to prove a set of sufficient conditions to enable us to represent the knowledge
of a DNN as symbolic primitives. To this end, if we ignore cognitive issues, Ren et al. (2023a)
and Li & Zhang (2023b) have considered Harsanyi interactions (Harsanyi, 1963) to represent the
symbolic primitives encoded by a DNN. It is because they have empirically observed that a well-
trained DNN usually only encoded a few salient interactions, and they have also observed that the
network output could be well mimicked by these interactions. Specifically, each interaction repre-
sents an AND relationship between a set S of input variables, and this interaction has a numerical
effect I(S) on the inference score of the DNN. The input variables can be image regions for image
classification or words for natural language processing. As Figure 1 shows, when classifying a dog
   ∗
     Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the Department of Computer Science and Engi-
neering, the John Hopcroft Center, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.


                                                  1
