Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




         𝑣(𝒙)
                                        𝑆1                     Interaction 1        𝐼 𝑆1 = 0.4
                                                                (activated)
          …
                    Explained as                                Interaction 2 𝐼 𝑆2 = 0
                                   𝑆3          𝑥2 𝑥1            (deactivated)                    𝑣(𝒙) = 𝐼 𝑆1 + 𝐼 𝑆2
    Feed to   DNN                                                             𝐼 𝑆3 = 0                  +𝐼 𝑆3 + ⋯
                                               𝑥3
                                                        𝑆2          Interaction 3
                                                                    (deactivated)
                                        𝑥4
                                                                ...

Figure 1: Illustration of interactions encoded by a DNN. Each interaction S corresponds to an AND
relationship among a specific set S of input variables (image patches). The patches x1 and x4 are
masked, so that interactions S2 and S3 are deactivated.

image, a DNN may encode a salient interaction among three image regions in S = {x1 , x2 , x3 }.
Only when all three image regions are present will the interaction be activated and contribute a nu-
merical effect I(S) to the inference score of the DNN. Masking any regions in S will deactivate the
interactions and make I(S) = 0.
Therefore, the proof of the emergence of interaction primitives is to prove a set of common con-
ditions, which makes a DNN only encode a small number of symbolic (sparse) interactions. It
means that given an input sample x, the inference score v(x) of the DNNP can be disentangled into
the sum of the effects I(S) of a few salient interactions, i.e., v(x) ≈ S∈Ωsalient I(S) + bias, which
can be called interaction primitives. Specifically, we prove three conditions. (i) The DNN has at
most M -th order non-zero derivatives, where M < n, and n is the number of input variables to
the DNN. (ii) The DNN can be used on occluded samples (e.g., an image with some patches being
masked), and yields a higher classification confidence when the sample is less occluded. (iii) The
classification confidence of the DNN does not significantly degrade on occluded samples. Because
these conditions are common for many DNNs, and the proof does not depend on the specific archi-
tecture of the network, our proof ensures that the emergence of symbolic interaction primitives is a
universal phenomenon for various networks trained for different tasks.
In fact, the essential reason for the emergence of sparse interaction primitives is neither the architec-
ture of the neural network, nor the sparsity of network parameters/intermediate-layer features, but
the property of the task. To be precise, when the task requires the DNN to conduct smooth inference
on masked/occluded samples, a well-trained DNN usually encodes sparse interaction primitives.

2   R ELATED W ORK
We have developed a system of game-theoretic interactions for explaining DNNs in the last three
years, and have published more than fifteen papers in this direction. This system focused on ad-
dressing the following problems in explainable AI: (i) explicitly defining, extracting, and counting
interactions encoded by a DNN, (ii) explaining the representation capacity (e.g., generalization abil-
ity and adversarial robustness) of DNNs from the perspective of interaction, and (iii) summariz-
ing/explaining common mechanisms shared by different empirical deep learning methods.
• Explicitly defining and extracting interactions encoded by a DNN. A representative approach in
explainable AI was to explain the interactions between different input variables (Sundararajan et al.,
2020; Tsai et al., 2022). Based on game theory, Zhang et al. (2021a;b; 2020) defined multi-variate
interaction and multi-order interaction. Ren et al. (2023a) discovered the sparsity of interactions in
experiments. Li & Zhang (2023b) further discovered that salient interactions were usually transfer-
able across different input samples and exhibited certain discrimination power. Chen et al. (2024)
extracted generalizable interactions shared by different DNNs. These studies indicated that salient
interactions could be considered as interaction primitives encoded by a DNN. Furthermore, Ren et al.
(2023b) used the sparsity of interactions to define the optimal baseline value for the Shapley value.
Cheng et al. (2021a) used interactions of different complexities to explain the encoding of specific
types of shapes and textures in DNNs for image classification. Cheng et al. (2021b) discovered that
salient interactions usually represented prototypical visual patterns in images.
• Explaining the representation capacity of DNNs using game-theoretic interactions. Game-
theoretic interactions have been used to explain the representation capacity of a DNN, although
the following studies used the multi-order interaction (Zhang et al., 2020), rather than the Harsanyi


                                                    2
