Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




interaction. Nevertheless, the Harsanyi interaction has been proven to be compositional elements
in the multi-order interaction. The multi-order interaction has been used to explain the adversar-
ial robustness (Ren et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2024), adversarial transferability (Wang et al., 2021),
and generalization ability (Zhang et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2024) of a DNN. In addition, Deng
et al. (2021) proved the difficulty of a DNN in encoding middle-complexity interactions. Ren et al.
(2023c) proved that compared to a standard DNN, a Bayesian neural network (BNN) tended to avoid
encoding complex Harsanyi interactions. Liu et al. (2023) explained the intuition that DNNs learned
simple Harsanyi interactions more easily than complex Harsanyi interactions.
• Summarizing common mechanisms for the success of various empirical deep learning methods.
Deng et al. (2024) found that the computation of attribution values for fourteen attribution methods
could all be explained as a re-allocation of interaction effects. Zhang et al. (2022a) proved that
twelve methods to improve the adversarial transferability in previous studies essentially shared the
common utility of reducing the interactions between adversarial perturbation units.

3       DNN S TEND TO ENCODE SPARSE INTERACTIONS
3.1 OVERVIEW OF THE EMERGENCE OF SYMBOLIC ( SPARSE ) INTERACTIONS IN DNN S
In this study, we aim to prove that symbolic (sparse) interactions usually emerge in a well-trained
DNN. Recent studies (Ren et al., 2023a; Li & Zhang, 2023b) have empirically discovered the emer-
gence of symbolic (sparse) interactions in various DNNs on different tasks. In mathematics, the
emergence of symbolic (sparse) interactions means that the DNN’s inference logic can be repre-
sented as the detection of a small number of interactions with a certifiably low approximation error.
• Definition. A clear definition of interactions encoded by a DNN is required. In this study, the
interaction is defined as the Harsanyi dividend (Harsanyi, 1963). Let us consider a trained DNN
v and an input sample x = [x1 , · · · , xn ]⊤ with n input variables indexed by N = {1, · · · , n}.
The input variables can be image regions for image classification or words in an input sentence
for a natural language processing task. Furthermore, without loss of generality, let us assume that
the output of the DNN on the sample x is a scalar, denoted by v(x) ∈ R. For DNNs with multi-
dimensional output, we may choose one dimension of the output vector as the final output v(x). In
                                                         p(y=y truth |x)
particular, for classification tasks, we set v(x) = log 1−p(y=y   truth |x) by following Deng et al. (2021).


The interaction effect of the Harsanyi dividend (Harsanyi, 1963) (or the Harsanyi interaction) be-
tween a set S ⊆ N of input variables is defined as follows:
                                             def
                                                   X
                                       I(S) =             (−1)|S|−|T | · u(T ),                             (1)
                                                   T ⊆S

                   def
 where u(T ) = v(xT ) − v(x∅ ). Here, v(xT ) denotes the network output on the masked input
sample xT , where the variables in N \ T are masked using their baseline values b = [b1 , . . . , bn ]⊤ ,
and the variables in T are unchanged. Accordingly, v(x∅ ) denotes the network output on the sample
x∅ , where all the input variables are masked. In particular, we have u(∅) = I(∅) = 0.
Each interaction can be understood as an AND relationship between input variables in S. For exam-
ple, as Figure 1 shows, to recognize a dog face, let a DNN encode the collaboration between three
image regions in S = {x1 , x2 , x3 }. Only when the image regions x1 , x2 , and x3 are all present will
the interaction be activated and make a certain numerical effect I(S) on the network output. The
absence (masking) of any of the three image regions (e.g., the masking of x1 in Figure 1) deactivates
the interaction and removes the numerical effect, i.e., I(S) = 0.
We followed Li & Zhang (2023b) to visualize interactions encoded by PointNet++ (Qi et al., 2017b)
on the ShapeNet (Yi et al., 2016) dataset. Each point cloud in this dataset contained 2500 points. To
simplify the visualization, Li & Zhang (2023b) considered each semantic part1 on the point cloud
as a single input variable to the DNN. Figure 2 shows that the interaction S = {light, front wheel}
usually contributed a positive effect to the network output (i.e., I(S) > 0), whereas the interaction
S = {front wheel, back frame, mid frame} usually had a negative effect (i.e., I(S) < 0).
• Faithful compositional inference patterns. We use the following three axiomatic properties to
define interactions as representations of faithful inference patterns (or concepts) encoded by a DNN.
    1
        Annotations of the semantic parts were provided by the ShapeNet dataset. See Appendix C.2 for details.


                                                           3
