Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




In fact, this scenario does not satisfy Assumptions 1-α and 1-β. In this case, we can simply ignore
small noises in v ′ (xS ) to obtain sparse interactions. To this end, Li & Zhang (2023a) proposed a
method to estimate and remove potential small noises from the network output and boost the sparsity.
Scenario 2. Let us consider the second scenario, in which the network output on a masked sample
xS is purely dependent on the number of variables in S. We consider an example in which the sign
of u(S) is decided by the parity of the number of variables in S, i.e., if |S| is odd, then u(S) = +1;
otherwise, u(S) = −1. In this case, I(S) is always positive if |S| is odd, and always negative if |S|
is even, which is not sparse. In fact, this scenario does not satisfy Assumption 2 (the monotonicity
assumption). In addition, the classification of the parity does not represent the typical paradigm for
classification because there are no inference patterns for classification.
Scenario 3. In this scenario, the network encodes high-order OR relationships between the in-
put variables. For example, the network may encode an OR relationship “blue patch 1” ∨ · · · ∨
“blue patch m” to recognize the sky. Such an OR relationship will be explained as a large number
of lower-order Harsanyi interactions. However, in real applications, such high-order interactions,
e.g., the detection of the sky, can actually be taken as a single concept. If we disentangle and remove
such high-order interactions from the network output, the remaining output is likely to generate
sparse Harsanyi interactions. In addition, this scenario does not satisfy Assumptions 1-α and 1-β.
Scenario 4. Let us consider Pthe scenario in which the network output is in the form of a periodic
function, e.g., v(xS ) = sin( i∈S xi ). In this case, interactions encoded by the network are not
sparse. This scenario does not satisfy Assumptions 1-α, 1-β, and Assumption 2.
Scenario 5. Let us consider the special task that heavily relies on the information of all input vari-
ables, e.g., judging whether the number of 1’s in a binary sequence (e.g., the sequence [0, 0, 1, 0, 1])
is odd or even. In this task, the value of p may be large, and the monotonicity assumption is not
satisfied. As a result, the interactions may not be sparse. See Appendix E.3 for experiments.

4       S IGNIFICANCE OF THE EMERGENCE OF INTERACTION PRIMITIVES
• The emergence of symbolic interaction primitives can be considered as a theoretical foundation
for the field of explainable AI. Many studies have attempted to explain the feature representation of
DNNs as the encoding of different concepts with clear meanings. For example, Bau et al. (2017;
2020) examined how each convolutional filter was related to its encoded fuzzy concept. Kim et al.
(2018) attempted to find a certain feature direction in the intermediate layer corresponding to a
specific manually-defined concept. However, the fundamental issue behind these explanations, i.e.,
whether a DNN can be faithfully explained as symbolic concepts, has not been studied.
• The proof of the emergence of interaction primitives may provide a new perspective to analyze the
generalization power and robustness of a DNN. In fact, game-theoretic interactions have been used
to explain overfitting (Zhang et al., 2020), adversarial robustness (Ren et al., 2021), and adversarial
transferability (Wang et al., 2021), although these studies used multi-order interactions (Zhang et al.,
2020) for analysis5 , rather than the Harsanyi interaction.
• Given the sparsity property and the universal matching property, the sample-wise transferability
property can be obtained by contradiction. If interactions are not transferable across samples, then
it means that the DNN activates different sets of salient interactions on different samples, and this
indicates that the number of interaction patterns encoded by the DNN will be explosively large.

5       C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study provided a set of conditions for the emergence of symbolic interaction primitives for
inference. Under these conditions, we proved that a DNN encoded very sparse interactions between
input variables. The commonness of these conditions indicated that the emergence of symbolic
(sparse) interactions was not unusual, but might be a universal phenomenon for various well-trained
AI models, because the proof does not rely on the network architecture. In future work, we will
attempt to derive a tighter upper bound for the number of valid interactions R(k) encoded by the
network. Additionally, we will further quantify the precise conditions that prevent the emergence of
symbolic interaction primitives from occurring in a DNN.
    5
        Harsanyi interactions are compositional elements of multi-order interactions (Ren et al., 2023a).


                                                          9
