Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




other images were taken as negative samples. The heavy computational cost did not allow us to test
on all samples in these datasets. Thus, similar to previous studies Li & Zhang (2023b), we used a
subset of samples to compute interactions. For all models except for LLMs, we followed the setting
of testing samples in Li & Zhang (2023b), in which 50 samples from the CelebA-eyeglasses dataset,
100 samples from the ShapeNet dataset and the MNIST-3 dataset, and 500 samples from each of the
three tabular datasets have been selected to compute interactions.
C.2 T HE ANNOTATION OF SEMANTIC PARTS
As mentioned in Section 3.1, given an input sample with n input variables, the DNN may encode at
most 2n potential interactions. The computational cost for extracting salient interaction primitives is
high, when the number of input variables n is large. For example, if each 3D point of a point-cloud
(or each pixel of an image) is taken as a single input variable, the computation is usually prohibitive.
In order to overcome this issue, Li & Zhang (2023b) annotated 8-10 semantic parts in each input
sample, and the annotated semantic parts are aligned over different samples. Then, each semantic
part in an input sample is taken as a “single” input variable to the DNN.
• For the ShapeNet dataset (Yi et al., 2016), Yi et al. have provided annotations for semantic parts
for input samples    in the motorbike category. The semantic parts include gas tank, seat, handle,
          Segment version-3
light, wheel, and frame. Based
          1_cluster_00，Sample 642on the original annotation, Li & Zhang (2023b) further divided the
annotation1_cluster_01，Sample
            for each motorbike489sample into more fine-grained semantic parts, including gas tank,
          1_cluster_02，Sample
seat, handle,                 116back wheel, front frame, mid frame, and back frame.
              light, front wheel,
           1_cluster_03，Sample 372
         1_cluster_04，Sample
• For images  in the MNIST-334dataset, we used the semantic parts annotated by Li & Zhang (2023b).
The annotation of different parts was based on some key points in each image. Figure 6 shows
examples of these semantic parts.




         Figure 6: Examples of annotated semantic parts for samples of the MNIST-3 dataset.


D       E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS FOR L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS AND MLP S
D.1 M ODELS AND DATASETS
We used off-the-shelf trained LLMs (including the OPT-1.3B6 model, the LLaMA-7B7 model, and
BAAI Aquila-7B8 model) provided by Huggingface in all our experiments. The detailed information
on these models and the training data can be found on the corresponding web pages.
To construct input sentences, for each paragraph in the SQuAD dataset, we first took the initial 30
words. Then, starting from the 31st word, we evaluated the following two conditions: 1) the current
word had a specific meaning and was not a stop word in NLTK (Bird et al., 2009), 2) there were
no punctuations like the period or the semicolon in the five positions preceding the current word. If
both conditions were satisfied, we stopped this process and considered the current word as the target
word for the LLM to predict. We considered the words before this target word as the input sentence
for the LLM. If either condition was not satisfied, we incorporated the current word into the input
sentence and continued evaluating the next word until this process stopped. For each input sentence,
we used 10 meaningful words (words that are not NLTK stop words or punctuations) annotated by
Shen et al. (2023) to construct the set of input variables N , so that we have n = |N | = 10. When
masking the input sentence, we only masked words in N , without changing other “background”
words. We tested on the first 1000 sentences in the SQuAD dataset. It was because the heavy
computational cost did not allow us to test on all 20000+ sentences in the dataset.
    6
      https://huggingface.co/facebook/opt-1.3b
    7
      https://huggingface.co/linhvu/decapoda-research-llama-7b-hf
    8
      https://huggingface.co/BAAI/Aquila-7B


                                                  28
