Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
aquila: 样本 0, 44



            Input sentence: Super Bowl 50 was an American football game to
            determine the champion of the National Football League (NFL) for
            the 2015 season. The American Football Conference (AFC)                         salient




                                                                                  |𝐼ሚ 𝑆 |
            champion Denver Broncos

            Predicted word: defeated                                                                  noisy

            Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 46
            Upper bound: 168.25                                                             index of interaction 𝑆



            Input sentence: After a punt from both teams, Carolina got on track
            with a 9-play, 73-yard scoring drive. Newton completed 4 of 4                   salient




                                                                                  |𝐼ሚ 𝑆 |
            passes for 51 yards and rushed twice for 25
                                                                                                      noisy
            Predicted word: yards

            Real # of valid (salient) interactions: 15
            Upper bound: 104.95                                                              index of interaction 𝑆



Figure 12: Comparison between the real number of valid interactions and the derived upper bound,
and visualization of normalized interaction strength in descending order on the BAAI Aquila-7B
model. Words in bold are the input variables in the set N for which we compute interactions.


E.3   M ORE DISCUSSIONS AND EXPERIMENTS ABOUT THE VALUE OF p
Although Assumption 3 does not constrain the upper bound for the constant p, we have conducted
experiments on LLMs to measure the true value of p in real applications. Figure 5(b) shows that
the value of p across different samples was around 0.9 to 1.5. According to either Theorem 3 or
experimental verification in Table 2, interactions encoded by these LLMs were sparse.
Despite the lack of the bound for p, our theory is still complete. It is because the contribution of
our study is to clarify the conditions that lead to the emergence of sparse interaction primitives,
instead of guaranteeing sparse interaction in every DNN. In most tasks (e.g., the aforementioned
classification tasks), these conditions are commonly satisfied, so that our theory has guaranteed the
sparsity of interactions without a need of actually computing the interactions. Section 3.3 discusses
a few special cases that do not satisfy the three common conditions. Therefore, instead of showing
that sparse interaction primitives will emerge in all scenarios, the goal of this paper is to identify
common conditions that provably ensure the emergence of sparse interaction primitives.
In addition, let us analyze how the sparsity of interactions depends on the value of p. Some special
tasks heavily rely on the global information of all input variables, e.g., the task of judging whether
the number of 1’s in a binary sequence is odd or even (i.e., judging the parity). Then, in these
tasks, the value of p may be large. Therefore, we conducted experiments to train an MLP to judge
whether the number of 1’s in a binary sequence (e.g., the sequence [0,1,1,1,0,0,1,0,1,1]) is odd
or even. Specifically, each binary sequence contains 10 digits. The MLP has 3 layers, and each
layer contains 100 neurons. We trained the MLP on 1000 randomly generated samples for 50000
iterations, with the learning rate set to 0.01, and the MLP achieved 100% accuracy on these samples.
We then tested the value of p and found that p was around 9.9 to 19.7, which is relatively large.
Fortunately, in most classification tasks as shown in Figure 5(b), the network usually shows a certain
level of robustness to the masking of input samples. Therefore, the value of p will not be very large
in most classification tasks, thus ensuring the sparsity of interactions encoded by the network.

E.4   S IZE OF IMAGE REGIONS DOES NOT AFFECT THE SPARSITY OF INTERACTIONS
We would like to clarify that the objective, i.e., the proof of the emergence of sparse interactions, is
agnostic to the selection of input variables for interactions. To better illustrate this, we conducted
experiments on the MNIST-3 dataset to show that the interactions were still sparse when the size of
image regions varied. Specifically, the original image parts annotated by Li & Zhang (2023b) were
of the size of 3 × 3 pixels. Then, we enlarged the size of image parts to 5 × 5 pixels and 7 × 7 pixels.
Figure 13 shows that the use of input variables of different sizes did not clearly affect the sparsity of
interactions.


                                                                 32
