Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




                                   Region size = 𝟑 × 𝟑                             Region size = 𝟓 × 𝟓                           Region size = 𝟕 × 𝟕




                                     salient                                         salient                                       salient
               |𝐼ሚ 𝑆 |




                                                noisy                                          noisy                                        noisy



                                index of interaction 𝑆                            index of interaction 𝑆                          index of interaction 𝑆


Figure 13: Normalized interaction strength in descending order. We compared the sparsity of inter-
actions when we extracted interactions by setting different sizes of image regions as input variables.
Interactions were still sparse when the size of image regions varied.


E.5 E XPERIMENTS ON RNN S
We conducted experiments on an RNN (i.e., the LSTM) to explore the possibility of applying the
Harsanyi interaction to a wider range of tasks. Specifically, we trained LSTMs with 2 layers on the
SST-2 dataset (Socher et al., 2013) (for sentiment classification) and the CoLA dataset (Warstadt
et al., 2019) (for linguistic acceptability classification). The LSTM can be considered to take natural
language as sequential data. Although these tasks are not equivalent to other prediction tasks on
sequential    data,样本:
       Lstm SST-2   they
                       17, provide
                            23, 46, 49 potential insights into how we can extend the Harsanyi interaction.
FigureLstm
         14 CoLA
             shows  that 8,the
                 样本：0,           network encodes relatively sparse interactions.
                             9, 31


                                     Sample 1                             Sample 2                         Sample 3                               Sample 4
       SST-2

                   |𝐼 𝑆 |




                                                                                                                                                                       𝑛
                            0   index of interaction 𝑆   2𝑛   0       index of interaction 𝑆   2𝑛   0   index of interaction 𝑆     2𝑛   0     index of interaction 𝑆 2

                                     Sample 1                             Sample 2                         Sample 3                               Sample 4
       CoLA

                   |𝐼 𝑆 |




                            0   index of interaction 𝑆   2𝑛       0   index of interaction 𝑆 2
                                                                                               𝑛
                                                                                                    0   index of interaction 𝑆    2𝑛    0     index of interaction 𝑆   2𝑛




 Figure 14: Interaction strength in descending order. The LSTMs also encode sparse interactions.


F    D ISCUSSION ON THE SETTING OF THRESHOLD τ                                                                           IN      S ECTION 3.2
In fact, the setting of τ is quite reasonable, because most interactions with |I(S)| < τ actually
have zero interaction effect I(S) = 0,Pinstead of having an extremely small yet non-zero effect
by coincidence. According to I(S) = T ⊆S (−1)|S|−|T | · u(T ), interaction I(S) is computed by
adding and subtracting an exponential number of non-zero terms. In this case, we usually obtain
two types of interaction effects. First, we may obtain I(S) = 0, if the DNN does not encode an
AND relationship between an exact set of variables in S. Then, different u(T ) values for T ⊆ S
will eliminate each other, as long as the DNN does not bring random noises to the output u(T ).
Alternatively, we may obtain I(S) with considerable value |I(S)| ≥ τ . In real applications, it is
unrealistic for a DNN to be so elaborately trained that adding up 2|S| terms results in an extremely
small yet non-zero interaction I(S), although we do not fully deny the negligible possibility that we
may have a few interactions with extremely small interaction effects.


                                                                                          33
