Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024




A    P REVIOUS LITERATURE OF USING INTERACTIONS TO EXPLAIN DNN S

Explaining the knowledge encoded by DNNs is one of the ultimate goals of explainable AI but
presents significant challenges. For instance, some studies employed visualization techniques to
show the patterns learned by a DNN (Simonyan et al., 2013; Yosinski et al., 2015), and some focused
on extracting feature vectors that may be associated with semantic concepts (Simonyan et al., 2013),
while some studies learned feature vectors potentially related to concepts (Kim et al., 2018). Dravid
et al. (2023) identified convolutional kernels in different DNNs that expressed similar concepts.
However, theoretically, whether the knowledge or the complex inference logic of a DNN can be
faithfully represented as symbolic primitive inference patterns still presents significant challenges.
Up to now, there is still no universally accepted definition of the knowledge, as it encompasses var-
ious aspects of cognitive science, neuroscience, and mathematics. However, if we ignore cognitive
and neuroscience aspects, Ren et al. (2023a) have proposed to quantify interactions between input
variables encoded by the DNN, to explain the knowledge in the DNN. More crucially, Ren et al.
(2024) have derived several theorems as mathematical evidence of considering such interactions as
primitive inference patterns encoded by a DNN. Specifically, Ren et al. (2024) proved that DNNs
usually only encoded a small number of interactions, under some common conditions2 . Besides,
these interactions can universally explain the DNN’s output score on any arbitrary masked input
samples. Li & Zhang (2023b) further discovered the discriminative power of certain interactions.
Besides, Deng et al. (2024) found that different attribution scores estimated by different attribution
methods could all be represented as a combination of different interactions. Zhang et al. (2022a)
used interactions to explain the mechanism of different methods of boosting adversarial transferabil-
ity. Ren et al. (2023b) used interactions to define the optimal baseline value for computing Shapley
values. Deng et al. (2022) found that for most DNNs it was difficult to learn interactions with me-
dian number of input variables, and it was discovered that DNNs and Bayesian neural networks
were unlikely to model complex interactions with many input variables (Ren et al., 2023c; Liu et al.,
2024). Zhou et al. (2024) used the generalization power of different interactions to explain the
generalization power of DNNs.

B    T HE CONDITIONS FOR UNIVERSAL MATCHING OF THE DNN OUTPUT

Ren et al. (2024) have proved that a well-trained DNN usually just encodes a limited number of
interactions. More importantly, one can just use a few interactions to approximate the DNN’s outputs
on all 2n masked samples {xS |S ⊆ N }, under the following three common assumptions. (1) The
high order derivatives of the DNN output with respect to the input variables are all zero. (2) The
DNN works well on the masked samples, and yield higher confidence when the input sample is less
masked. (3) The confidence of the DNN does not drop significantly on the masked samples. With
these natural assumptions, a well-trained DNN’s output on all 2n masked samples can be universally
approximated by the sum of just a few salient interactions in Ω, s.t., |Ω| ≪ 2n .

C    P ROOF OF T HEOREMS

Theorem 2 (Universal matching theorem) Let us be given a DNN v and an input sample x. For each
randomly masked sample xT , T ⊆ N , we obtain
                                       X                  X
     v(xT ) = vand (xT ) + vor (xT ) =      Iand (S|xT ) +                    Ior (S|xT ). (7)
                                           S⊆T                    S∈{S:S∩T ̸=∅}∪{∅}


Proof. (1) Universal matching theorem of AND interactions.
Ren et al. (2023a) have used the Haranyi dividend (Harsanyi, 1963) Iand (S|x) to state the universal
matching theorem of AND interactions. The output of a well-trained DNN on all 2n masked samples
{xT |T ⊆ N } could P  be universally explained by the all interaction primitives in T ⊆ N , i.e.,
∀T ⊆ N, vand (xT ) = S⊆T Iand (S|x).

                                                                              (−1)|S|−|L| vand (xL )
                                                                      P
Specifically, the AND interaction is defined as Iand (S|x) :=             L⊆SP
in Equation (1). To compute the sum of AND interactions ∀T ⊆ N, S⊆T Iand (S|x) =


                                                 12
