                  Bayesian Neural Networks Avoid Encoding Complex and Perturbation-Sensitive Concepts

A. Discussion on literature in representation capacities of BNNs
Many studies investigated the representation capacity of BNNs from different perspectives. Gal & Smith (2018) and Carbone
et al. (2020) proved that BNNs were robust to adversarial attacks. Kristiadi et al. (2020) proved that BNNs could mitigate the
over-confidence problem in standard ReLU networks. Wenzel et al. (2020) considered that the poor performance of BNNs
was due to the inappropriate prior distribution of weights in the BNN, and a series of studies (Wu et al., 2019; Krishnan et al.,
2020; Fortuin et al., 2022) found that using carefully-designed prior distributions of weights could improve the performance
of the BNN. Zhang et al. (2022) also showed that adding adversarial perturbations to weights during training could improve
the performance of the BNN. Besides, Foong et al. (2020) proved that using either fully-factorized Gaussian distributions or
dropout operations to approximate the posterior distribution of a BNN would lead to inaccurate uncertainty estimation of the
network prediction. Unlike previous studies, we focus on the conceptual representation of BNNs, and theoretically prove
that mean-field variational BNNs are less likely to encode complex interactive concepts than standard DNNs.

B. Discussion on literature in interactions in neural networks
Interactions in game theory are often used to explain neural networks and are closely related to the quantification of
concepts. Grabisch & Roubens (1999) first proposed the Shapley interaction index, and Lundberg et al. (2018) later used this
index to explain tree ensembles. Janizek et al. (2021) explained the pairwise feature interaction in DNNs, while Sundararajan
et al. (2020) proposed the Shapley Taylor interaction index to quantify interactions among multiple input variables. Ren
et al. (2023a) used game-theoretic interactions to analyze the emergence of concepts in the training of neural networks, and
proved the faithfulness and sparsity of such formulation of concepts. In this paper, we follow the definition of concepts
in Ren et al. (2023a), and prove BNNs’ tendency to avoid encoding high-order (complex) concepts.

C. Discussion on literature in the connection between adversarial robustness and interpretability
Recent studies have shown that adversarial robustness is closely related to the interpretability of neural networks. Etmann
et al. (2019) discovered and explained the phenomenon that adversarially robust models exhibit simpler and more human-
interpretable saliency maps. Engstrom et al. (2019) demonstrated that adversarially robust models showed clear human-
recognizable features when using the optimization-based feature visualization method (Olah et al., 2017), and the mapping
from input images to intermediate features of the model is approximately invertible. Ilyas et al. (2019) demonstrated that
adversarial samples can be attributed to the existence of non-robust features (features that are noisy and not interpretable
to humans, but are highly predictive). Ren et al. (2021) showed that high-order (complex) interactive concepts encoded
by neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial attacks, and that adversarially-trained DNNs encode more discriminative
low-order (simple) interactive concepts than standard DNNs. In this paper, we prove that BNNs tend to avoid encoding
high-order (complex) interactive concepts, which implies that BNNs may exhibit good adversarial robustness, from the
perspective of conceptual representations.




                                                              12
