               Mlp5 mnist sample 0
                   Bayesian Neural Networks Avoid Encoding Complex and Perturbation-Sensitive Concepts

                     Feature distribution of the BNN           Approximated feature distribution of the surrogate model
          Layer2
   5000


      0

          Layer3
   5000


      0

          Layer4
   5000


      0



                               Figure 6. More visualization results of MLP-5 on the MNIST dataset.


Implementation details of the reference value. Let Ex [xi ] denote the mean value of the i-th input dimension over all input
samples in the dataset. Then, given an input sample x, the reference value is set as follows.
                                                  
                                                     xi − τ, xi > Ex [xi ]
                                             ri =
                                                     xi + τ, xi < Ex [xi ]

where τ ∈ R is a constant. We set τ = 0.5 on all datasets (including the TV news dataset, the Census dataset, the MNIST
dataset, and the CIFAR-10 dataset). In our experiments, we assume that input samples have been normalized as follows. First,
we subtract the mean value of each input dimension over the whole dataset from the input sample. Second, we divide each
dimension of the input sample by the standard deviation of this input dimension over the whole dataset. In this way, input
samples have zero mean and unit variance on each dimension over the whole dataset, i.e., ∀i ∈ N, Ex [xi ] = 0, Varx [xi ] = 1.
Implementation details of the experiment in Section 2.2 of the main paper. In Section 2.2 of the main paper, we
minimized the KL divergence between the feature distribution in the surrogate DNN model and the feature distribution in the
BNN. The feature distributions in the surrogate DNN model and in the BNN were not Gaussian distributions. Therefore, the
KL divergence between the feature distributions did not have a close-form formula. To facilitate the optimization, we simply
used two Gaussian distributions to approximate the feature distributions in the surrogate DNN model and in the BNN, and
optimized the KL divergence between the two Gaussian distributions. Besides, we did not consider the dependency between
different feature dimensions to simplify the computation.

I. More visualization results for experiments in Section 2.2 of the main paper
In this subsection, we provided more visualization results to show that the feature distribution of the surrogate DNN model
could well approximate the feature distribution of the BNN.




                                                               23
