                    HarsanyiNet: Computing Accurate Shapley Values in a Single Forward Propagation


                         Table 5. Training cost per epoch (s) of the HarsanyiNet and the comparable DNN
                                         Dataset      HarsanyiNet     Comparable DNN
                                         Census            5.0               1.9
                                         MNIST            243.3             127.0
                                         CIFAR-10         205.0             106.7

                                     Table 6. Model robustness and Shapley value robustness
           Model          Classification accuracy of adversarial examples (%)   ℓ2 norm of the Shapley value difference
           HarsanyiNet                         13.83%                                            1.44
           ResNet-18                            8.21%                                            1.50


on HarsanyiNet (estimated by the ℓ2 norm of the difference of Shapley values, the lower the better) is slightly higher than
that of ResNet-18.
Both experiments indicate that HarsanyiNet has a robustness close to, or even slightly higher than, that of the traditional
model.

F.5. More results of the estimated Shapley values on the HarsanyiNets
We conducted more experiments to show the explanations produced by our HarsanyiNets. Specifically, we trained the
Harsanyi-MLP on tabular datasets and the Harsanyi-CNN on image datasets.
For the tabular datasets including the Census, Yeast and TV news datasets, we compared the estimated Shapley values
for each method in Figure 7, Figure 8, and Figure 9, respectively. It can be seen that the Shapley values calculated
by our HarsanyiNet were exactly the same as the ground-truth Shapley values calculated by Definition 1, while the
approximation methods, including the sampling method (Castro et al., 2009), antithetical sampling (Mitchell et al., 2022),
KernelSHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017), and KernelSHAP with paired sampling (KernelSHAP-PS) (Covert & Lee, 2021),
needed thousands of network inferences to compute the relatively accurate Shapley values.
For the image datasets including the MNIST and CIFAR-10 datasets, we generated more attribution maps on different
categories in Figure 10 and Figure 11, respectively.

F.6. Experiment details for computing interaction strength of Harsanyi interactions encoded by a DNN
When the number of input variables is small (e.g., n < 16), we can iteratively calculate the interaction strength of all
Harsanyi interactions following Definition 2. For tabular datasets, including the Census, Yeast and TV news datasets, we set
the baseline value of each input variable the mean value of this variable over all training samples. Then we computed each
Harsanyi interaction’s strength in a brute-force manner.
For the MNIST dataset, it is impractical to directly compute the Harsanyi strength of all Harsanyi interactions. To reduce
the computational cost, we randomly sampled 8 image regions in the foreground of each image following the previous
work (Ren et al., 2023a). Then we were able to compute the Harsanyi effect of all possible Harsanyi interactions among the
sampled 8 image regions (In total we obtained 28 = 256 different Harsanyi interactions). In terms of the baseline value, we
set, for each pixel, the baseline value to zero.

F.7. Experiment details for generating attribution maps in Figure 4
We compare the attribution maps of each method on the Harsanyi-CNN models. To facilitate comparison with other methods,
the Harsanyi-CNN for the MNIST dataset was constructed with 4 cascaded Harsanyi blocks, and each Harsanyi block
had 32 × 14 × 14 neurons, where 32 is the number of channels. The hyperparameters were set to β = 100 and γ = 0.05
respectively. The Harsanyi-CNN for the CIFAR-10 dataset was constructed with 10 cascaded Harsanyi blocks, and each
Harsanyi block had 256 × 16 × 16 neurons, where 256 is the number of channels. The hyperparameters were set to β = 1000
and γ = 1 respectively. In this way, the HarsanyiNet and the other four model-agnostic methods used the same model to
ensure the fairness of the comparison.
Besides, since the Harsanyi-CNN model calculated Shapley values on the feature z(0) , we also calculated Shapley values on

                                                               18
