                       HarsanyiNet: Computing Accurate Shapley Values in a Single Forward Propagation




Figure 7. Shapley values computed by different methods on the Census dataset. The number of inferences conducted for each method is
indicated in the brackets. The samples in the first row are from category ‘≤50K’ and the samples in the second row are from the category
‘>50K’.


z(0) using the sampling, KernelSHAP, and DeepSHAP methods. For the MNIST dataset, we run about 20000 iterations of
the sampling method and 20000 iterations of the KernelSHAP method until convergence. For the CIFAR-10 dataset, we run
about 20000 iterations of the sampling method and 200000 iterations of the KernelSHAP method until convergence.
For the FastSHAP method, we used the training samples x and the model predictions of the Harsanyi-CNN to train a
explainer model ϕf ast , and slightly modified the model architecture to return the attribution maps with a tensor of the same
size as the size of z(0) , i.e., 14 × 14 for the MNIST dataset and 16 × 16 for the CIFAR-10 dataset. For the MNIST dataset,
since (Jethani et al., 2021) did not report the explainer model ϕf ast , we trained a explainer model with the same structure as
which the CIFAR-10 dataset used, and computed the attribution maps on the MNIST dataset.

F.8. Experiment details for comparing computed Shapley values with true Shapley values on the MNIST and
     CIFAR-10 datasets
As mentioned in Section 4.2, in order to reduce the computational cost, we randomly sampled n = 12 variables in the
foreground of the sample as input variables on image datasets. In this way, ground-truth Shapley values were computed
by masking the selected 12 variables and keeping all the other variables as the original variables of the sample. Let us
denote the set of the selected variables as N̂ , thus, |N̂ | = 12. Specifically, we set all the variables xi , i ∈
                                                                                                                 / N̂ as the baseline
value, i.e., ∀i ∈
                / N̂ , bi = xi and ∀i ∈ N̂ , bi = 0, to obtain a baseline sample v(x∅ ). Based on the baseline sample v(x∅ ),
we obtained 2|N̂ | different masked samples. For the HarsanyiNet, when we computed the Shapley values for the selected
variables based on Theorem 1, we only visited the sets that contain the selected variables, i.e., S ∋ i, ∀i ∈ N̂ . Besides, |S|
denoted theP                                Pn in S. In this way, we computed the Shapley values for the selected variables
              number of the selected variables
                                1
by ϕ(i) = S⊆N :S∋i,i∈N̂ |S|       I(S) and i=1 ϕ(i) = v(xN = x) − v(x∅ ). For the ShapNets, we set all the variables
       / N̂ as the baseline value bi = 0 to obtain a masked sample x′ , i.e., x′i = xi , ∀i ∈ N̂ ; x′i = 0, otherwise. Then, with
xi , i ∈
the masked input sample, we could compute the Shapley values for the selected variables with the ShapNet.




                                                                  19
